Add guidance for color contrast considerations for themes and inputs (#560)
primer/design: content/guides/accessibility/color-considerations.mdx

---
title: Color considerations
description: Color is an important aspect of creating accessible, inclusive experiences. 
---

## Overview

This guidance covers considerations that can't automatically be integrated into Primer. It supplements [accessibility guidance given in the Color portion of our Foundations documentation](https://primer.style/design/foundations/color#accessibility).

### Design tokens

The majority of color contrast considerations should be handled by [Primer color design tokens](https://primer.style/design/foundations/color#how-to-use-color-for-product-ui). Ensure that solutions for the following considerations integrate design tokens as a method of creating accessible experiences.

### Determining contrast

[WebAIM's Contrast Checker tool](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/) is the recommended way to calculate color contrast ratios.

### The APCA

> The [Advanced Accessible Perceptual Contrast Algorithm](https://www.myndex.com/APCA/) (<abbr>APCA</abbr>) is a proposal and is **not normative**. In terms of WCAG, and therefore, MAS-C compliance, this means that color contrast is valid **only** if it meets WCAG 2.1 criteria. 

Reviewer: WCAG 2.1 Level A and AA criteria"? Thinking of the number of questions we get around AAA/high contrast mode in Slack.

Author: Good call. Added this and language about what high contrast is in https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/dbc099e30d8702eb394d617af302260908983f58

A color value that is APCA-compliant **may not** be WCAG compliant until APCA is integrated into WCAG 3.0. WCAG 3.0 is still a work in progress and currently does not have an anticipated release date.

## Compliance 

> The following guidance is based on one or more **normative** Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (<abbr>WCAG</abbr>) success criterion. This means that it is objective requirements with implications that affect MAS-C compliance efforts, as well as international laws regarding accessibility.

Reviewer 2: > This means that it is objective requirements with implications that affect MAS-C compliance efforts, as well as international laws regarding accessibility.

Is it possible that there is a mistake in here? `This means that it is objective requirements` I don't 100% get what this means, so it is hard for me to propose an improvement.

Author: Does [this example](https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/c8120e43a00aaefccad7feee2632937db43176fa) help?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following guidance is based on one or more **normative** Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (<abbr>WCAG</abbr>) success criterion. This means that the guidance is based on objective requirements with implications that affect MAS-C compliance efforts, as well as international laws regarding accessibility.
```

Could we add this and does it represent what you intended with this paragraph.

Author: Done!

Non-normative suggestions are also supplied, but marked as such.

## Visual themes

GitHub offers two parent themes: Day (light) and Night (dark). Each parent theme has a default appearance, and then a suite of sub-themes. Sub-themes include considerations for high and low contrast experiences, as well as certain vision conditions.

It is possible to set GitHub to use a dark sub-theme when a parent Day theme has been set, and vice-versa. This allows a user to have a fine-grained control over their experience.

> ### Default theme

Reviewer 2: Yes, both dark and light mist hit contrast. We can't control which theme a user lands on, so they both are considered default themes.

> ### Default theme

Author: I am all for shooting for default Night theme being compliant, but my understanding of what WCAG requires is only our "default" theme, which is Day. 

My thinking here is it is what is shown to logged out users, and what GitHub also uses for new account creation, or unset theme preferences.

> ### Default theme

Reviewer 2: > only our "default" theme, which is Day.

I think this assumption is wrong. By default if a user visits github.com with their device set to dark mode, github.com will be shown in dark mode (even when not logged it).

For those users the default mode is `Night`.

> ### Default theme

Reviewer 3: Confirmed!

> ### Default theme

Author: You're right! Weird, I couldn't get that to work last time I tried with a private window? 

Anywhoo, it is now updated in https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/9064ebafd505726bd9cfe3e31cfde275921db0e6 to call out Day and Night default themes. Thanks for your patience here, y'all.

> GitHub uses the default Day (light) theme when a user visits the site in a logged out state. Because the visitor is logged out, they are unable to adjust the theme in the [Appearance settings](https://github.com/settings/appearance).

Reviewer: Lots of because's in this section. I would change the second sentence to "When not logged in, users cannot adjust the theme in the [Appearance Settings]."

Author: Love it. Updated in https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/6a81a0e7269ec34654cfdbd34a0acde4aaf6f6e9.

> Because of this, [the default Day theme **must** to satisfy WCAG criteria for color-related concerns](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance). From a high-level, this means that **all** GitHub content displayed using the default Day theme must:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of this, [the default Day theme **must** satisfy WCAG criteria for color-related concerns](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance). From a high-level, this means that **all** GitHub content displayed using the default Day theme must:
```

Author: Oh! Nice catch, thank you!

> Because of this, [the default Day theme **must** to satisfy WCAG) criteria for color-related concerns](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance). From a high-level, this means that **all** GitHub content displayed using the default Day theme must:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Because of this, [the default Day theme **must** to satisfy WCAG criteria for color-related concerns](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance). From a high-level, this means that **all** GitHub content displayed using the default Day theme must:
```

- Pass color contrast requirements, and

> - Have the mechanism for accessing and changing the theme be fully WCAG compliant.

Reviewer 4: I kinda love this whole section as just a general rule when someone talks about user settings for things! No action needed here just wanted to call that out.

Author: 😭

This is the strongest guarantee we have that: 

1. Content can be perceived—and therefore understood and used—across a wide range of vision conditions, and that
2. The mechanism to adjust GitHub's theme can be operated by the widest range of input modes.

This allows users to use GitHub in a logged-out state. If a user is logged in, it also enables them to address their own specific usability and access needs, as well as aesthetic desires.

### Non-default themes

> [All sub-themes **do not** need to meet WCAG color contrast requirements](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance), provided the default Day theme and its content is accessible. This guidance is derived from [WCAG 2.1 Technique G174](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G174).

Reviewer: I feel like we talk about everything but Dark mode, but it's not made clear if that's needs to be compliant? I get that the sub themes don't have to be, which is fine.

Reviewer 2: Agree, we should add it here.

```suggestion
[All sub-themes **do not** need to meet WCAG color contrast requirements](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance), provided the default Day and Night theme and its content is accessible. This guidance is derived from [WCAG 2.1 Technique G174](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G174).
```

Author: Holding off on this one until we have consensus in https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560#discussion_r1301903858

Certain themes are specifically designed to create a low contrast effect, notably the Dark Dimmed theme. 

In this use case, a user selecting this theme is likely intentionally expressing a desire for an experience with less visual contrast. Like other theme selections, this may be to satisfy aesthetic sensibilities, or access needs that are derived from visual conditions that make a higher contrast experience unusable. In the case of access needs, a higher contrast experience may actually be less accessible for the user.

The availability of the Dark Dimmed theme treatment allows users to customize their GitHub experience without having to resort to browser extensions or other user-hosted modifications. Of note is the portability of this theme, in that it will automatically be available across multiple sessions and devices.

> While other sub-themes are not required to meet WCAG color contrast requirements, GitHub should strive to ensure they can be whenever possible. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While other sub-themes are not required to meet WCAG color contrast requirements, GitHub should strive to ensure they do whenever possible. 
```

As other sub-themes are not specifically designed to create a lessened contrast experience, there is less certainty that a user who is using the sub-theme has no contrast-related access needs. 

> Because of this, sub-themes such as Light/Dark Protanopia & Deuteranopia should strive to be WCAG color contrast compliant. This is especially relevant for Light/Dark High Contrast sub-themes.

Author: Totally makes sense. I took a shot at [rephrasing it](https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/217554775853cdb3ff9657974c52ac536bf5de81). Does it read better to you now?

> Because of this, sub-themes such as Light/Dark Protanopia & Deuteranopia should strive to be WCAG color contrast compliant. This is especially relevant for Light/Dark High Contrast sub-themes.

Reviewer 3: :chefs kiss:

## Inputs

Being able to perceive the boundaries of an input is vital. Meeting WCAG color contrast requirements helps to ensure the widest possible range of users can perform the data entry required to operate GitHub successfully.

Broadly-speaking, there are four overall considerations for input contrast:

1. Text,
2. Borders, 

> 3. Selected state contrast, and

Reviewer: Do we want to add error state here?

Author: Yes! Added language on validation state here https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/36d01b6f463d290b81e4ea7614b2dab7d2346ee2

4. Icons.

Combined, meeting contrast requirements allow a user to understand:

1. What the input is for,
2. What area of the input a user can interact with, and
3. What state the input is in.

If a computed color value in any of the four considerations is not compliant, it may endanger one or more portions of user understanding and operation of the input.

### Text contrast

Text portions of an input **must** meet a contrast ratio of `4.5:1` for "normal text", or `3:1` for "large text". This applies to both an input's label and its user-provided text content.

> The majority of GitHub input text size is "normal text". Both "normal text" and "large text" are WCAC-specific terms. More information about this can be found on [the Key Terms subsection of SC 1.4.3: Contrast (Minimum)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html#dfn-large-scale).

Author: Ooh, nice catch. Thank you!

### Border contrast

Borders communicate **the boundaries of an input**, and are considered non-text contrast. This includes inputs that allow for freeform user input such as text, and also pre-specified inputs such as checkboxes.

> Borders of an input **must** meet a contrast ratio of `3:1`. This is calculated by the border's computed color value compared to the computed background color the input is placed on.

Reviewer 2: I understand this. I do want to mention that this is different from our original interpretation of the specs and will have a huge impact on githubs UI as basically all inputs are failing this atm.

The previous interpretation was: If the label meets `4.5:1` border does not need to.

Reviewer 5: @lukasoppermann I'm thinking about putting together a feature flag test for this during passion week next week so we can just make a decision 😆 I think we just need to see it in action throughout GH.

### Selected state contrast

> Selection state communicates **if a user has chosen an input**, and is considered non-text contrast. Examples of this are a checkbox's check, a radio's dot, and a select menu option's background color.

Reviewer 3: > a select menu option's background color.

When I read this I was thinking select panel (which we use radios and checkboxes for), and was like, "we don't use colored backgrounds for select menu items?" 

I don't know if it needs to be edited just something I wanted to note from my brain!

Author: That's a good call, thank you! [I removed it from the PR](https://github.com/primer/design/pull/560/commits/aa0e0ab162f79ffe9da2f1278b457ed3d854bef2) because of the storied history we have around it. I think the remaining two examples communicate what we're talking about here clearly.

Selected state of an input **must** meet a contrast ratio of `3:1`. This is calculated by the border's computed color value compared to the computed background color the input is placed on.

### Icon contrast

Icons can either be:

> 1. Functional, or

Reviewer: A numbered list of two items feels like it could just be one sentence, i.e. "Icons can either be functional or decorative".

- The dark purple is part of a new branding update,
- Etc.

### Normative requirements

The **normative requirement** for going with dark purple would be [comparing the final computed color value used for the dark purple background color against the color value used for text](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/?fcolor=FFFFFF&bcolor=510094).

### The APCA

The [Advanced Accessible Perceptual Contrast Algorithm](https://www.myndex.com/APCA/) (<abbr>APCA</abbr>) is a proposal and is **not normative**. In terms of WCAG, and therefore, MAS-C compliance, this means that color contrast is valid **only** if it meets WCAG 2.1 criteria. 

A color value that is APCA-compliant **might not** be WCAG-compliant until APCA is integrated into WCAG 3.0. WCAG 3.0 is still a work in progress and currently does not have an anticipated release date.

## Visual themes

GitHub offers two parent themes: 

1. Day (light), and 
2. Night (dark). 

Each parent theme has a default appearance, and then a suite of sub-themes. Sub-themes include considerations for high and low contrast experiences, as well as certain vision conditions.

> <img src={ButtonFunctionalIcon} alt="GitHub's theme picker showing Day and Night parent themes, with swatches for each of the nine sub-themes. The Day theme is active. Cropped screenshot'" />

Author: Oops, yeah. Updated the `src` reference.

- Whatever theme the user has set in their account settings. 

When not logged in, users are unable to adjust the theme in the [Appearance settings](https://github.com/settings/appearance).

Because of this, [the default Day **and** Night theme **must both** satisfy WCAG criteria for color-related concerns](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance). From a high-level, this means that **all** GitHub content displayed using the default Day and Night theme **must**:

- Pass color contrast requirements, and
- Have the mechanism for accessing and changing the theme be fully WCAG compliant.

This is the strongest guarantee we have that: 

1. Content can be perceived—and therefore understood and used—across a wide range of vision conditions, and that
2. The mechanism to adjust GitHub's theme can be operated by the widest range of input modes.

This allows users to use GitHub in a logged-out state. If a user is logged in, it also enables them to address their own specific usability and access needs, as well as aesthetic desires.

### Non-default themes

> [The Night (dark) and **all** Day and Night sub-themes **do not** need to meet WCAG color contrast requirements](https://github.com/github/accessibility/blob/main/docs/coaching-recommendations/primer/color-modes.md#guidance), provided the default Day theme and its content is accessible. This guidance is derived from [WCAG 2.1 Technique G174](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G174).

Reviewer 3: Wait, doesn't the Night theme need to hit contrast? 😅

Reviewer 2: I also don't think this makes sense. This means:

If a user is using dark mode on their mac and visit github.com (without being logged in) they get the dark theme that is not accessible and can't change it.

The difference between **inputs** and **buttons** may be confusing. Understanding the difference between the two types of UI helps to understand why they are evaluated differently for color contrast purposes.

At a high-level:

- Buttons **perform a predetermined action** when pressed. Examples of this are submitting form input, triggering a dialog, or saving user-entered content.
- Inputs **collect information for eventual submission**. Examples of this are single and multiline text-entry areas, checkbox selections/radio choices, and comboboxes.

Inputs and buttons are combined to form data collection and transmission experiences such as a contact form or a Pull Request submission. 

### Inputs

Being able to perceive the boundaries of an input is vital. Meeting WCAG color contrast requirements helps to ensure the widest possible range of users can perform the data entry required to operate GitHub successfully.

#### Input considerations

Broadly-speaking, there are four overall considerations for input contrast:

1. Text,
2. Borders, 
3. Selected state, and

> 4. Validation state, and

Reviewer 3: Do we want the final "and" here?

Author: Nope!

Combined, meeting contrast requirements allow a user to understand:

1. What the input is for,
2. What area of the input a user can interact with, 
3. What information a user has entered into the input, and
4. What state the input is in.

If a computed color value in any of the four considerations is not compliant, it may endanger one or more portions of user understanding and operation of the input.

#### Input text contrast

Text portions of an input **must** meet a contrast ratio of `4.5:1` for "normal text", or `3:1` for "large text". This applies to both an input's visible label and its user-provided text content.

> <img src={InputText} alt="A wireframe illustration of a text input. Its label reads, 'Name.' It's user-provided text content reads, 'Mona Lisa.' A label pointing to the label reads, 'Communicates purpose.' A label pointing to the user provided content reads, 'Communicates user choice.'" />

Reviewer 3: To me, it makes more sense to have this image before the input text contrast section so that it's in the input consideration section

Inputs without visible borders must use their background color instead. In this case, the required contrast ratio is `3:1`, with the computed input background color and the color of the background of what the input is placed on.

<img src={InputBorderContrast} alt="A wireframe illustration of a text input without a border. Its label reads, 'Phone number.' It's user-provided text content reads, '123-456-7890.' A label pointing to the input's background reads, 'Communicates interactive area boundary.'" />

#### Input selected state contrast

Selection state communicates **if a user has chosen an input option**, and is considered non-text contrast. Examples of this are a checkbox's check or a radio's dot.

<img src={InputSelectionState} alt="A wireframe illustration of a checkbox input with a checkmark indicating it has been placed in a selected state. A label pointing to the checkmark reads, 'Communicates user choice.' A label pointing to the checkbox's border reads, 'Communicates interactive area boundary.'" />

> Selected state of an input **must** meet a contrast ratio of `3:1`. This is calculated by the border's computed color value compared to the computed background color the input is placed on.

Reviewer 3: This one's a bit confusing to me because we've been talking about checkboxes. In this case, we just want to make sure that the selected state is identifiable from the non-selected state. The border may or may not have a part in this for instance, if our checkboxes didn't turn blue and just put a check in the middle, that would still pass. Sorry to put a little wrench in this a small wrench in this 😅

Author: Resolved via a pairing session with @ichelsea

The reason for this is that the text label communicates the input's purpose, provided its computed color value is WCAG compliant. The icon in this circumstance reinforces the text label. 

An example of this is a button with both a [trash Octicon](https://primer.style/design/foundations/icons/trash-16) **and** a text label of "Delete".

<img src={ButtonDecorativeIcon} alt="A wireframe illustration of a button. It only has the GitHub Octocat logo in its center, and no text. A label pointing to the icon reads, 'Communicates purpose.' A label pointing to the button's background and border reads, 'Reinforces interactive area.'" />

Beyond the scope of normative WCAG guidance, a further consideration is if making a decorative icon color contrast compliant is useful for aiding in facilitating understanding, even if it is not required to be.

#### Button border contrast

The contrast of a button's border color compared to the input's background color **does not** need to meet a contrast ratio. Only the [button's text](#button-text-contrast) or [functional icon](#functional-icons) does.

#### Button disabled state contrast

> Broadly-speaking, buttons **should not** be disabled until form validation criteria has been met. An example of behaviro to avoid is disabling a submit button until a user has filled out all required fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Broadly-speaking, buttons **should not** be disabled until form validation criteria has been met. An example of behavior to avoid is disabling a submit button until a user has filled out all required fields.
```

If a button needs to be placed in a disabled state, [it **does not** need to be color contrast compliant](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html#inactive-controls). Other WCAG criteria may affect this treatment, however.

> Beyond the scope of normative WCAG guidance, a further consideration is there are other ways to visually communicate a disabled button, or to design the system in system in such a way that a button cannot circumstantially be placed in a disabled state. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Beyond the scope of normative WCAG guidance, a further consideration is there are other ways to visually communicate a disabled button, or to design the system in such a way that a button cannot circumstantially be placed in a disabled state. 
```

## Patterns that might be confusing

Following are examples of unique GitHub UI that are worth specifically documenting:

### GitHub's search

GitHub's search **visually** looks like an input, but is coded as a button. 

<img src={SearchCollapsed} alt="GitHub's search in its collapsed state. It visually looks like a text input with a magnifying glass icon and placeholder text that reads, 'Type forward slash to search.' An accompanying faux submit button is also present, that looks like a command line prompt awaiting input. A label is pointing to the entire width of the search input and indicates that it is a HTML button element. Cropped screenshot." />

This is because it triggers the dialog that displays the full search interface—a user **cannot** directly enter text into a faux-input field. Because of this, it is **treated like a button** in terms of normative color contrast evaluation.

When the search dialog is displayed, the input that a user types in is treated as a text input for color contrast purposes.

> <img src={SearchExpanded} alt="GitHub's search in its expanded state. It visually looks like a text input with a magnifying glass icon. Below it are lists of popular owners and repositories, with the prompt to navigate to each entry. A label is pointing to the text input portion of the search input and indicates that it is a HTML input element with an attribute of 'text.' Cropped screenshot." />

Reviewer 3: I don't know if I would include this one because this pattern has a ton of problems and I've recommended several times that this not be a faux input button because of the confusion it has, and the improper aria label that it implies. That's just me on my soapbox though.

Author: This was included on request from @lukasoppermann when we last chatted about the document. Not sure if it would do more harm than good to include, but the idea was to pre-empt common questions with something we could link to.

I do see what you mean about not encouraging this approach, however. Do you think there is language we could include to communicate that?

Author: Resolving via a pairing session with @ichelsea
